pain is a good thing physically
because that is your
preservation self-preservation mechanism
but suffering is something that you do
in your mind
so pain that happens in your body you
take it in your mind and multiply it a
thousand times or a million times
depending on how capable you are and
suffer it a million times over
right now
most human beings are like this what
happened
10 years ago they can still suffer
what may happen day after tomorrow they
already suffer
they are not suffering life they think
they are suffering life they are not
suffering life
they are suffering the two most
fantastic faculties that human beings
alone have
a vivid sense of memory and a fantastic
sense of imagination
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a mystic and new york
times best-selling author who has built
one of the largest non-profit
organizations in the world name one of
the 50 most influential people in all of
india not bad considering the country
has 1.3 billion people he has been
invited to speak at some of the most
prestigious international conferences on
the planet including the world peace
summit the united nations and the world
economic forum his mission is to raise
every human being to the peak of their
potential and to that aim he established
the isha foundation which with
headquarters in both india and the us
has implemented several large-scale
human service projects designed to
uplift rural areas help with education
reform and environmental stewardship as
well as holistic and healthy living
he's also written several profoundly
transformational books including inner
engineering a yogi's guide to joy and
addy yogi the source of yoga so please
help me in welcoming the contemporary
spiritual leader with millions of global
followers the man who has cracked
irreverent jokes everywhere from mit to
google on things both mystical and
highly practical the uncompromising sud
guru
[Applause]
welcome
i am beyond excited to have you on the
show
um
going and looking at your
what you're trying to accomplish in the
world
is very much in line with what we're
trying to do in terms of human potential
which i think is super exciting but we
definitely
we go about it in very different ways
and reading your book i was really
impacted and so getting to dive deeper
into this i think is going to be a lot
of fun and i think the first place to
start
walk me through what you mean by
potential like what what do you think is
human potential
see every creature
from a worm insect bird plant tree
everybody
all of them are trying to be
full-fledged lives
if one sees
what's happening beneath the earth in
terms of the root systems
it is an enormous effort
for a plant or a tree to become
a full-fledged tree
well an apple tree is not trying to be
an oak tree
but an apple tree wants to be a
full-fledged apple tree
that effort is on in every life
so is it in human beings
but the problem with humanity is just
this
that for every other creature
nature has drawn two lines
within these two lines they live and die
so their idea of full fledge is hitting
the ceiling of their life
but if a human being hits a ceiling he
gets frustrated and miserable
[Laughter]
because
nature this process of evolution has
delivered to us to a place where there
is only the bottom line there is no top
line though some human beings are trying
to breach the bottom line and go below
that effort also is going on
so essentially
what human life is is
when
life was in the other forms of life that
you see on the planet
nature determined a certain compulsive
instinctive ways of functioning
once you become human
these lines have been removed
you can act consciously
that means
what you call as human potential is not
of any kind of measurable limit
it can go as far
as you desire or as far as you have the
courage to walk
so when we say human potential
unleashing human potential
it is not about reaching the peak
it is a trajectory
because
what our life is
is a combination of a certain amount of
time and energy
time is rolling away for all of us at
the same pace
if you sit it rolls away if you sleep it
rolls away if you do something it goes
away if you don't do anything it goes
away you're happy or miserable it goes
away
time is running out for all of us
so it's only the energy that you can
do different things with
if you bring your energies to a certain
level of intensity
and possibility
what somebody does in 10 years you may
do it in one year this means if you live
here for 100 years it feels like in
people's impact that you have created it
feels like you lived here for a thousand
years
simply because
you have managed your life energies in a
certain way
so for me
a human being being impactful means
how conscious have you become this is
very important
because if you're in compulsive cycles
then your energy gets wasted in so many
things if you observe people
in a day let's say let's take 24 hours
in that anyway most people by
prescription in america they sleep for
eight hours
[Laughter]
so eight hours means one third of life
is gone
in the remaining two thirds they have to
eat they have to you know shower
bathroom this that all these another two
three hours gone
so literally fifty percent
of life is gone daily basis
just for basic maintenance of this life
fifty percent of the time is gone in
maintenance remaining fifty percent what
they have
if you look at every single move that
they may make with their body their
thought process their emotions you will
see a whole lot of it is happening in
compulsive cycles
or in other words
if you are a little sensitive to life
you will realize you are the biggest
issue in your life
so this is one thing
that i'm trying to do with people that
you are never the issue in your life
i'm not the issue my thought my emotion
my body is never the issue
my thought my emotion my energy and my
body are my instruments of function they
are not impediments in my life
but i would say for 90 of the human
beings their own body
then the compulsions of the body the
compulsions of their thought the
compulsions of their emotions
are ruling them most of the time
so when you yourself are a problem
well
your own self-help
so how do you begin to break out of that
like if we're all stuck in these
compulsive patterns um how do you
gain the consciousness that you're
talking about and begin to i don't know
if the words go beyond elevate like how
do you stop being in that endless cycle
everybody wants a solution but nobody
wants to delve into the problem and see
what is the nature of the problem that
we have
the nature of the problem is like this
why are we compulsive what is it that's
compulsive about us
compulsion means we are going to the
same place again and again that means
we're going in circles
the nature of physical existence in the
universe is such
whether you take an atom an individual
atom or the cosmic space
everything that's physical is always in
cyclical movement
the atoms are doing their circles the
solar system is doing his stuff the
galaxies are doing their stuff our own
bodies are going through cycles in fact
we are born
because of the cycles in our mother's
bodies that's why we are born
so entire physical nature is born out of
cyclical movement that means
compulsiveness so do not misunderstand
compulsiveness as something bad it's the
basis of your existence
it is a good platform
but you're supposed to stand on the
platform and act right now you have
become the platform so somebody else
will dance on you
interesting that's um so my thing and
part of what drives me is getting um
getting efficient at achieving your goal
which i'm sure
is less
so for me
i i am interested in
actually executing on my potential so
transferring my ability to do something
into the actual thing so the easy
example i give people is what is what
does impact mean for you leaving a
footprint
um not quite so i have a very specific
kind of impact that i'm trying to have
which is to help people
actuate their potential so i think that
a lot of people um they are capable of
extraordinary things and i think that to
your point about joy i think one of the
things that's absolutely foundational to
joy is growth and so getting people on a
path where they believe that they see it
that way
that's why is growth foundational to joy
joy is foundational to growth isn't it
um
probably yes but i don't have an insight
as to what came first
which is exactly why you're here no
there is substantial medical and
scientific evidence to show
that
only when you're in a pleasant state of
experience your body and your brain
works at its best there's no argument
about that there's enough evidence to
show that
so whatever impact or success or
reaching goals or growth or whatever you
say
on one level in the physical world it's
about how well you harness
your physiological and your
psychological process isn't it
whether your body and mind works against
you or works for you this is a big
difference
so there is enough evidence to show only
when you're in pleasant levels of
experience this happens best
so obviously joy is fast
then growth
if you're joyful constantly and you have
no fear of suffering because you
understand all human experience comes
from within you
and so you have managed to create the
kind of experience that you want now
growth is possible and brittle
if you have the fear of falling down and
suffering
you will not go very high isn't it
so how do you work through that how do
you help people on that path
many ways to look at it one of the
simplest ways to see it is
all human experience has a chemical
basis to it
right now let us say you're joyful
if you look at your chemistry it'll be
in a certain way
let's say you are miserable
if you check your chemistry it'll be a
completely different way
now we have a technology
that with which you create a chemistry
of blissfulness
so my chemistry is blissful
doesn't matter what's happening
the drama around me is happening in so
many different ways
but
this is a privilege that i've kept for
myself
me being joyful or miserable
me being
peaceful or
disturbed
these privileges have not given it to
anybody else i kept them to myself i
think every human being should do that
that the privileges of the nature of
your experience must be in your hand
because when you try to act in the world
there are many many forces
all of them will not always cooperate
sometimes they cooperate many times
they will not cooperate many times
they'll turn against you this is the
nature of the world that's how it should
be
world will never happen 100 your way and
i'm glad it is so because if it all
happened your way where do i go
[Laughter]
i'm glad it's not happening your way
little bit my way a little bit your way
a little bit somebody else's way that's
how the world should be that's very
interesting
is there a way to
avoid falling into those traps like i
know that you've taken some um
very
different approaches at least from an
american set of eyes
to raising your daughter and not wanting
her not wanting to put a lot of
teachings on her um
is
that to avoid dogma is it to avoid
closing doors because you think you know
something like how how do we if we were
gonna have kids and raise them in a way
that stopped them from falling into some
of these traps what would we do
how many parents would they have
an encourage their children
not to be identified with parents
not to be identified with the religion
that they follow
not to be identified with their racial
and national and other prejudices that
they hold they all think these things
are sacred isn't it yes
these are the things which destroy human
potential
whether you want to turn a human being
see i see this uh term and it
it it really hurts me
when people say
it's very common only in america i hear
this i was raised
as uh whatever catholic or baptist or
christian or muslim or whatever else
i was raised
see you must raise only cattle and sheep
you don't raise human beings
you have to cultivate a human being
you have to give space and give support
of love and support so that a human
being grows because every human being is
capable of a unique
possibility
raising means water flock is what you
raise you don't raise an individual
isn't it
that's very interesting
so
for this
we need to come to a certain level of
maturity within ourselves
the most fundamental thing is our
children need not look like us
no not think like us need not act like
us
need not be ours in any way
a child is not a legacy
it's a life
and it's an individual life
it has to be what it has to be
well if i do not influence right now the
fear is if i do not influence somebody
on the street will influence the child
on the social media they'll influence
the child
so to
to cultivate a child so that
they know
that the intrinsic intelligence and
being human is more important than being
influenced by this or that it doesn't
matter what it is
whether it's parentage or it's a priest
or it's a guru or it's a pundit it
doesn't matter who
influence is not important
what is important is the intrinsic
intelligence finding its full potential
and do you think as we grow up in a
modern context that um we can
avoid adopting those
beliefs you talked one time i thought
this was so interesting about
how every time you get a belief it's
like a conclusion and every conclusion
is a death unto itself and it's like
shutting a door on something yes
otherwise see you just see
you look at your own picture when you're
five years of age it's like this
slowly it's becoming like this what is
it you're dying in installments
the more conclusions you make the less
alive you become
this is all that's happened to people
they call this knowledge
this is not knowledge
this is just conclusions that you're
drawing about everything
see with all this scientific exploration
the fact is
that even today we do not know one
single atom in its entirety
we know how to use them
we know how to use everything on this
planet but we don't know what damn thing
about anything
over 90 percent
or 99
of an atom is empty we don't know what
that emptiness contains
over 99 of the cosmos is empty we don't
know what that is
so
this is like
i give you a million piece jigsaw
but you found
in your hands you have only three of
them
with these three you make a pitcher and
you're euphoric that you made a picture
well i'm sorry
there are million pieces to this
has anybody gathered all the pieces
no
then don't make a picture wow
you've talked about the only way to
really um make change is to turn inward
as we look inward turn inward go inward
what are we
are we working on awareness
consciousness
like what is the
see right now what are the instruments
of your experience
you know you're here only because you
can see
hear smell taste and touch this is the
only way you know that you're here right
now
suppose your doze off don't okay suppose
you doze off
you don't know that you're here isn't it
yes
even though you're here
your heart is beating everything is
functioning the world is on we are all
here
but you won't know that you're here nor
will you know that i'm here or anybody
else is here isn't it yes all that's
happened is life is on full-on even
within you only thing is these five
sensory organs have shut down
so your entire experience of life right
now is happening because you can see
here smell taste and touch
just look at the nature of the sensory
organs in the very nature
they're outward bound isn't it
can you roll your eyeballs inward and
scan yourself no
this is a
shall i give you a bad example sir
your our nose is located nigh right
above our mouth
suppose you don't brush your teeth for
three days
though this nose is right here it won't
tell you you have not brushed your teeth
the whole room will know you have not
brushed your teeth but you will not know
this is the human predicament
it's very easy to see what's wrong with
this guy what's wrong with her what's
wrong with her
it's very it takes a lot of observation
to see what's wrong with this
that
level of keenness of observation is
missing in most people they need to
cultivate that
and so it's tempting to um when reading
your book and hearing your story it's
tempting to say oh this is how he
cultivated that whether it's sitting in
the tree that was swaying and then doing
swaying meditation
um
is that actually how you cultivated it
or is there something else because
somebody watching right now they want to
be able to begin to access this and if
it's a simple letting go of belief and
dogma or if it's awareness of this stuff
belief in dogma is not simple
it's not simple people
are who they are only because of what
they believe and what they have hell
like that
because without this they don't know
where they belong
to live here without belonging to
anything but still involved with
everything
takes a lot
most people belong but they're not
involved
it is like belonging is like an
insurance policy
it's simply there
involvement takes you
to be constantly involved with people
around you
it takes you to be conscious and on
but i belong to you
i don't have to do anything i've i've
professed already i belong to you i'm
married to you i belong to you
legally it is settled
so i don't have to be conscious of you
nor do i have to be involved with you
still i belong to you
so belonging means
belonging believing
or
identifying simply means
you have found a way to sleep through
your life
it's called sleep
when we say
you know people usually use this term
with animals
if you said we put our cat to sleep
what does it mean to you
for real that they
killed their cat yes
so i'm talking about sleep in that
context
i believe this i belong to this
i'm identified with this means
it's sleep
that means you're partially dead
you made conclusions which takes away
the life that bubbles within you this is
why people are walking around like uh
they're dying in installments
yeah so the notion of
not knowing the notion of responsibility
are two things that are are
really powerful can i can i just correct
that question yeah yeah
not knowing is not a notion it's a fact
okay it's not a notion you really do not
know damn thing about this existence
isn't it yes
we don't even know a blade of grass in
its entirety we do not know a single
atom in its entirety we do not know a
single cell in this body in its complete
context
we do not we know some things
we can manipulate a few things but we
don't know much about it
so
it's like this
let's say we turn off all the lights
if the lights are on you can whistle and
just walk around wherever you want in
this building we'll turn off all the
lights and make it pitch dark where you
can't even see your own hand like that
now every step that you take will you
take it in at most alertness
will you be fully awake or asleep
fully awake fully awake why because you
don't know where the next step
just to live like this
if you simply live like this
naturally you're on the highway to
enlightenment
everybody assume and believe
because it's comfortable
to simply believe something the very
word belief means this
that i have concrete concretized
assumptions of which i know nothing
about
isn't it
isn't it so yeah
either you know or you do not know
where does the belief come from
when you pretend what you do not know as
i know
that's belief
but you can't believe something all by
yourself
so you need a hundred people around you
that's why always believers are in
groups
seekers are alone
talk to me about a seeker what what is a
seeker is that something useful to
cultivate
you don't have to cultivate this this is
intrinsic to human intelligence if you
do not yourself
with all kinds of things that you do not
know as you know
is intrinsic to human intelligence to
seek
isn't it
yes
you don't have to teach seeking
you have to teach belief systems you
don't have to teach seeking if you don't
teach anything everybody is a seeker
it is the nature of human intelligence
it naturally seeks
but people want to seek with the comfort
of belief
they want to be in the belief system and
then seek
this is like tying your boat to the pier
and then
rowing hard
it's good it's not bad because it gives
you good exercise it's like being on the
treadmill
most people are on the treadmill because
they are not walking or running to go
somewhere
they're just trying to tone their
muscles it's perfectly fine
so if that's all you wish to do it's
fine but if you want to go somewhere you
can't tie your boat and then row isn't
it
if you just let it go even if you don't
row it will go
what do you tell people about
responsibility
it's just your ability to respond you
have to make up your mind do you want to
retain your ability to respond
to every situation that may arise or may
not arise in your life
or do you want to surrender your ability
to respond
this is something everybody should make
up their mind on
do you have practices to keep yourself
so open and so joyful
life
that's it
what else
life is an openness
that is closing isn't it
that is a closure
life is a possibility
if you're just alive
everything is open
tell me can you be alive suppose you
don't like me
so you don't want to inhale what i
exhale
stop breathing and exist for some time
let me see possible yes without
breathing
for a little while
how is little how much is little for you
to hold my breath yeah
i don't know 30 seconds 10 seconds 10
minutes definitely not 10 minutes
so i'm saying if you don't like me your
dislike will not go away in 30 seconds
isn't it yeah for sure suppose i hate
you
i don't want to breathe inhale what you
exhale
i will die within myself isn't it yes
this all people are doing to themselves
i like this guy i don't like that guy
this is somebody i love that's somebody
i hate this is belongs to me this
doesn't belong to me they're just
killing themselves step by step
they're planning to die in installments
if you want to live
here you are
you must make up your mind
whether you want to live or you want to
die you want to know the certainty of
death in life
this is called belief this is called
belonging this is called identification
because you are trying to find the
certainty of death in the seamless
process of life
that's very interesting
when you i mean you spend a lot of time
speaking what do you hope people take
away is there one core thing that you
really want people to be touched by
fundamentally if people understand that
the source of human experiences within
you
joy or misery agony or ecstasy pleasure
or pain
everything comes from within you if you
understand this much
if i understand
suppose right now i think i'm miserable
because of you
there's no solution for my life isn't it
because all you have to do is walk in
front of my home i will become miserable
so simple it is you don't have to kill
me you just have to walk around in front
of me i will die within myself every day
if i understand the source of my joy and
misery are within me
then
you know what's the obvious choice
joy
it's obvious choice isn't it
so this one fundamental thing has to get
across to all the human beings on this
planet
your experience
is entirely determined by you
this is what the word karma means
unfortunately it's become something else
here
karma means action
that means
when we say
your life is your karma we are saying
your life is entirely your making 100
percent
what happens in the world there are many
many forces involved what happens within
me it's 100 me
isn't it yes
if you don't take charge of this
then you're an accidental life
when you're an accident in life anxiety
is very natural
natural isn't it
suppose you're driving
accidentally
that is you don't know what's happening
and you're simply somehow going anxiety
is natural or no yes
any accidental moment creates anxiety
so this is why consciousness means this
that you have taken charge
of the instruments of life
which on most fundamental level is our
physiological and psychological space
you've taken charge of this
now your health your happiness your joy
your ecstasy your misery everything is
in your hands
you exercise them as you want yeah
going back to what you said about focus
in your book you talked about something
i thought was so interesting to set the
faucet to a certain drip rate and do
nothing but focus on the dripping of the
faucet for like seven minutes or
something the idea is to pay attention
to something which has no relevance to
you
see people are
have divided the universe
this is important this is not important
this person is important for me this
person is not important this is
important for me that's not important
for me
you divided the universe you will never
know anything this way
indiscriminate focus indiscriminate
attention
i am not attending to you because you
are somebody with a cobra in your heart
all right
it doesn't matter who i speak to who i
am with i'm the same way
indiscriminate
only when your attention and involvement
is indiscriminate
does the universe open up to you
you have discriminated
naturally you close you know people come
to me and say sadhguru i want to walk
the spiritual path
i say okay
be here for three days
let's see what we can do so no such
group day after tomorrow my uncle's
daughter's birthday i have to go
oh you want to get enlightened
and day after tomorrow uncle's
daughter's birthday also all right
we got one and a half days
you do one thing you do this this and
this i said sarguru but i don't like
this
all right i'll give them a small piece
of paper
and say okay write down things that you
like we'll do only do that
you won't believe it in this entire
universe most people like only three or
four things
when
you're so constipated in your head
that you lack only three or four people
or three or four things in your life
how do you want to open up to the
existence
because life is happening because of its
openness
this is a fundamental difference between
death and life is
people are thinking it's just breath all
right on one level that is also openness
whether you allow this to happen or you
don't allow it to happen
whether you did it consciously or
unconsciously but it's happening isn't
it openness is on every subatomic
particle is in communication with
everything that's why this is going on
breath is happening so much is happening
in connection with everything it is only
in openness you're alive
as you close doors you're dying in
installments
dying in installments is torture
see
life is fantastic if you're alive and
fully alive
if you're dead it's good
at least the neighbors may think so
this may sound very
not so compassionate but i'm saying
everybody dies you and me will die all
right
if you're dead if the game is over but
if you're half dead oh
this is endless torture to yourself
when you are being tortured of course
you will share it with everybody else
talk to me about your motorcycle
accident and having to have your calf
sewed back together which is without
anesthesia
how is that possible i'm not that young
anymore
today i would take anaesthesia
those were wild days
but the notion of the difference between
pain and suffering i thought was very
useful
so pain is physiological it's there it
was no pain most people would not even
know how to protect themselves
see just because there's no pain in the
sea what all you have done to it
isn't it
see there's no pain in this so that's
why you
took it off if there's no pain in your
nose
maybe you would have taken it off
because there are many advantages you
will take in about 22 extra oxygen if
you just remove this one thing
contraption
[Laughter]
wherever there is no pain people are
messing with it like crazy isn't it they
call this hairstyle they call it so many
things yeah
suppose there was no pain in the entire
body in los angeles
people would pull out their stomach bag
and
you think they wouldn't do it no
probably what
only pain is helping them to preserve
themselves isn't it so pain is good
there's no physiological pain most
people would not know i hear in united
states there's one group they call
themselves something i forget that word
they're actually cutting their fingers
off their hands off on the video
wow they're posting it online
there's a group like that wow
can you imagine this no
in spite of so much pain if there was no
pain
almost everybody would have cut
themselves off into in the name of
fashion they would have cut themselves
into ribbons
so pain is a good thing physically
because that is your
preservation self-preservation mechanism
[Music]
but suffering is something that you do
in your mind
so pain that happens in your body you
take it in your mind and multiply it a
thousand times or a million times
depending on how capable you are
or how stupid you are and suffer it a
million times over
right now
most human beings are like this what
happened
10 years ago they can still suffer
what may happen day after tomorrow they
already suffer
they are not suffering life they think
they are suffering life they are not
suffering life
they are suffering the two most
fantastic faculties that human beings
alone have a vivid sense of memory and a
fantastic sense of imagination
why do you think that depression and
anxiety suicide are so rampant right now
see one thing is
the survival processes become easier
than ever before
believe me in the morning if you need a
bucket full of water if you had to walk
a mile to the river to get one bucket of
water
and your family needed 25 buckets of
you would have no time to mess yourself
now you have a lot of time to mess
yourself because our survival is better
organized than ever before another thing
is most human beings do not know how to
manage their biochemistry without
physical activity
i have seen a whole lot of people
particularly
teenage boys and girls between the ages
of 12 and 16 who come to me with some
severe
violent problems within themselves
if you leave them like that they may
kill themselves or kill somebody else
they're in that kind of state
many of them have even killed their
parents you know it just happened all
over the world
and
in 2017 when i came to know that in
india
which is not so much suicidal in that
sense because there's a huge family
support and stuff like that in spite of
that
in 2017 18 600 children below 18 years
of age committed suicide
out of which 7 200 are below 15 years of
age
so 12 13 14 year olds
who must be bubbling with life
are wanting to take their own lives why
obviously we're doing something
fundamentally wrong with the society
isn't it
yes
our goals and our stupid ideas of what
is success is driving them nuts
because we are trying to use our
children like racehorses
that's interesting
and when you say that as something to
that represent us that we've turned into
something amazing or in what way are
they like racehorses see when you
understand life as a race
if you're in a race what's the objective
you must reach the finish line quick
isn't it
yes what is the finish line of your life
death
there you have it
this may not be a conscious process
but
life within you is understanding it like
that
when you see you must understand this
whether you are conscious of conscious
of it or not any human being right now
if you make yourself miserable you must
understand you are sending a message to
every cell in the body that i don't want
to live
you might not have articulated it in
your head yet
but when you become miserable you notice
suddenly your body seems heavy
and it's like doesn't want to get up
from this chair
have you seen this yes
when you're happy
you're willing to bounce at everything
and do everything bend backwards if
necessary
why this is happening is the message is
gone to every cell in the body this guy
wants to die
they're all thinking okay what can we do
to help him but by then of course you'll
recover
so you want to die you want to live you
want to die you want to live
the body is getting confused
because you must understand this is a
very intelligent body
it's taking instructions from you
every cell in the body has enormous
sense of memory and intelligence
if you keep sending wrong messages
if they act you did
because you're sending contradictory
messages you're not dead you're half
dead
you can give it any number of exotic
names essentially you have turned your
intelligence against yourself
this is supposed to work for you but now
you've turned it against yourself it's
working against you
yeah i know i'm putting words in your
mouth which is very dangerous but the
whole notion of
being half dead i feel like you really
address how to live fully in your book
inner engineering which i i was just
really really impacted by
if you had to
define what inner engineering is exactly
how would you say it
see do you agree with me
that our lives today as a generation of
people
has become far more comfortable and far
more convenient
simply because of our understanding of
science
and
our
exploitation of that knowledge as
technology yes
we are the most comfortable generation
ever in the history of humanity no
question about it
isn't it yes
we are super empowered because of the
science and technology
as there is a science and technology for
our external well-being there is a whole
science and technology for inner
well-being
unfortunately
most cultures have ignored this and
thinking that if you make all the
external arrangements well everything
will be okay
united states of america
is a huge statement that this is not how
it works
the most affluent country on the planet
70 of the population are supposed to be
on prescription medication
yeah
wow
what's the best way for people to
interact with you
they don't have to interact with me
because learn from me maybe
because
we can talk if inspiration is what you
need encouragement you was what you need
i am willing to talk
but talks will not bring solutions
they will bring some clarity
solution will come only when you take a
proper inward step that's what an
engineering process is we are doing
everything possible to deliver it in as
simple and as practical measures as it
can be done there was a time it was
thought in such a complex way
today we have simplified it broken into
five different pieces offering it as
five layers of program
so that people can experience it in
small doses and slowly step by step they
can go i'm seeing as you come into more
and more affluent societies their steps
are far more baby steps than other
people
that's interesting so
we've broken it into many steps so that
small steps you can take one by one
and your website is the best place for
that yes okay it's a good place to go
perfect
asia.guru.org that's what it's called
okay and we'll link to that as well our
organization is a 100 volunteer
organization
so we are not professional in our
approach and i'm very proud of that
because
i'm not interested
in how much somebody is doing i'm very
interested in how they're doing it
because that's what changes the quality
of who we are
because the content of our life will not
change our life it is the context of our
life which changes our life
that's interesting
very interesting
because your content you have changed
and you see people are not happy
content of our life is phenomenally
enhanced compared to how our
grandparents lived here isn't it even in
this country yes
definitely how can people change their
context
that's what in engineering is about if
your context shifts from
your psychological and physiological
process to the life process that you are
everything has changed
because we must understand this as we
sit here this is my body that's your
body this is my mind that's your mind
but there's no such thing as this is my
life and that's your life
this is a living cosmos everybody is
free to capture as much as they want if
you capture substantial amount of life
your very presence will become a
significant life
otherwise you will become a mediocre
life this is the important thing it's
not the knowledge you gather in your
head it's not the muscle that you gather
in your body it's the life
how much of a life are you
this will make you significant in your
very presence if world gives us an
opportunity
we'll do something impactful
otherwise we're just a significant
presence
a huge oak tree standing outside
it is not trying to create any impact
it is just impactful
if you go under its shade you will feel
it
otherwise also its impactful
most people notice it only when it's
gone
[Music]
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
when i was 25 years of age when suddenly
things burst forth within me
and i realized if i sit here
without messing myself
naturally i'm bursting with ecstasy and
every cell in my body drips ecstasy
i thought initially i'm going off my
rocker
then
again and again when i saw over a period
of six to eight weeks when i saw if i
just closed my eyes i just burst into
ecstatic states
so i clearly realized
if i don't mess
with my physiological and psychological
process
ecstasy is the only way to be
nothing to be done you don't have to do
anything
when i realize this
i
sat down and actually planned
on that day the world's population was
5.6 billion people
i made a plan in two and a half years
time
that i will make the world ecstatic
no food like a young fool you know
now uh it's been 37 years
not two and a half years
well people say we have touched over 500
million people or so whoa
don't say whoa you don't wove my
failures
yeah i guess because my idea of humanity
is 7.6 billion people
500 million people
time going away
i'm
i'm condemned to die a failure
but i'm a blissful failure
all right
so
what we need is just this do you want to
live in a
beautiful world means what
beautiful does not mean just a beautiful
view of the ocean
or
something else
beautiful means
human life here is pleasant
within every human being
the question is not about what i wear
what i drive where i live but how i am
within myself
see
what we can do in the world is a
question of times
in which time of history we exist
accordingly we do things
if we were here 100 years ago we
wouldn't be recording all this stuff all
right we would be doing something
different
but
human experience
is constant
whichever generation you are you can
either be
blissed out or misery
always forever it has been so and it
will be so
so
what we can do in the world is subject
to many realities of the times
but how we can be within ourselves
is always a possibility so what is
always a possibility must be manifested
whether you will run faster than mr bolt
or not whether you will climb mount
everest or not this is not the point
those things are subject to individual
tastes and individual likes and dislikes
but
will your experience of life on this
planet be pleasant or not at least this
one thing we must determine that every
human being's experience of life on this
planet is pleasant that much we must do
and it's doable
that is incredible
said guru thank you so much for being on
the show that was absolutely incredible
thank you for your time
guys i can't recommend his book highly
enough
check it out inner engineering it's
phenomenal if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you again so much wow that was
really amazing look at yourself in 10 15
20 years time and ask yourself the
question
is that where i want to be
and if the answer is no
then you need to find a new part
to just get to understand yourself you
don't know what you need in your life
until you figure out who you are